[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Imagine for a moment
historians of the distant
future grappling with the
question of which event best
described the
latter 20th century.
Would it be the explosion
of the first atomic bomb?
Or the emergence
of the internet?
Or even the astonishing
creation of 500 channels
of television without
anything much worth watching?
Perhaps.
But then again, it just might
be the moment on June the 24th,
1947 when the pilot of a single
engine plane, a salesman named
Kenneth Arnold,
was amazed to see
nine metallic objects
zooming past Mount
Rainier at impossible speeds.
Flying, he said,
like saucers would
if you skipped them on water.
In the following
weeks, thousands
of reports of flying
saucers flooded
in from much of the world.
In the shadow of the atomic
age, the era of UFOs had begun.
>> (SINGING) We lived
our little drama.
We kissed in a field of white.
And stars fell on Alabama.
>> But why is this event so
important that it should even
be mentioned alongside the
most expressive milestones
of the last century?
>> We bring you this special
radio television broadcast
in order to give you the
very latest information
on an amazing phenomenon.
>> Well, perhaps it's because
it was the first portent
of the time when our
world will change forever,
the cataclysmic instant when
certainty dawns that there are
others out there far
more advanced than us,
that we are not the pinnacle
of creation we have taken
ourselves to be, that we are
only mere babes emerging from
our planetary cradle.
And perhaps it's important
because the story
of how the momentous question,
are we being visited,
arose, evolved, and was
eventually dismissed
by much of mainstream culture.
It is a story that
tells us a lot
about our civilization,
its hopes, its fears,
and its secret workings.
Like all good tales,
it needs a teller.
I was probably born for it.
I mean, look at those
hands pointing to the sky.
By age eight, I was
a boy astronomer,
a certified outer space junkie.
At 13, having precociously
chosen a career
path in astrophysics, I was
home from school for lunch
when I heard the tail
end of a news report
that a flying saucer had
been seen over the city
and children were
hiding under their beds.
I left early to walk
back to school eagerly
scanning the skies.
As I crossed the
playing field, I
spotted a red dot at
12:00 o'clock high.
And like a balloon,
it just sat there
not moving in the slightest.
When I came out later
for recess, it was gone.
That night, I went
to the public library
and took out every book I could
find about flying saucers.
I followed the subject
off and on ever since.
It's a strange and
fascinating mystery
that's hard to penetrate because
there are no good one stop
sources of information.
And the gold is
almost impossible
to separate from the dross.
>> Flying saucers have
invaded our planet.
>> The evidence,
as we shall see,
that some UFOs are from
somewhere else may be very
compelling.
But there's no smoking gun,
no landing on the White House
lawn.
>> They've set up an
electronic screen.
>> However, it is precisely
this absence of proof that has
allowed us to turn the UFO
phenomenon into a Rorschach ink
blot, an amorphous shape
on which we have projected
our hopes and fears.
We have mythologized it.
>> People of Earth, attention.
>> And in the process,
we've made it difficult,
if not impossible, to address
the question of its reality.
So this is the story
of how that happened.
And it begins, if
it has a beginning,
in the Pacific Northwest
on the 24th of June 1947.
While he was flying
home to Idaho
at the end of a business
trip, Kenneth Arnold
spent an hour searching for a
downed plane in the wilderness
of Washington state.
It was a bright sunny day
with perfect visibility,
but he had no luck.
Arnold sold forest
firefighting equipment
hopping about the Northwest
in his single engine CallAir.
As he turned towards home,
a blinding flash of light
caught his attention.
He located its source as
sunlight reflecting off
the metallic surface
of nine objects flying
south past Mount Rainier.
Arnold clocked their speed
over the 47 mile distance
to Mount Adams at
1,800 miles an hour,
almost four times
faster than any plane
known to be flying at the time.
Thinking they might be test
craft and 1,800 miles an hour
was too fast to
even contemplate,
he cut it to 1,200
miles an hour when
he reported what he'd
seen to a local newspaper.
The story was picked up
by the AP wire service,
and a headline writer
labeled them flying saucers.
>> He certainly had to be flying
in a very strong inversion.
The possibilities of there
being optical illusions
in that situation was something
that was a possibility.
Mirages do seem to be
moving and moving fast.
>> If it's a mountain mirage
which he's talking about,
they stay above the
tops of the mountains.
They don't move laterally.
And they fade in and out.
And of course, they appear
to be inverted images
of the top of the mountain.
Another more recent
explanation was geese.
The most recent one,
which has actually
led to a new
terminology, and Ufology
called pelicanism where you
take a explanation which
seems, to me anyway,
and a careful analysis
to be totally ridiculous.
And you push it as
hard as you can.
Ornithologists think
it could be pelicans.
Pelicans can be very bright
when reflecting sunlight.
>> And apparently, they
can move quite fast,
clocked on Arnold's watch
merrily gliding along at 1,800
miles an hour.
Meteors have also
been suggested.
Though, how meteors could
have traveled for 47
plus miles
horizontally has never
been explained,
nor how they could
resemble what Arnold drew.
Even though there
had been dozens
of local reports of strange
aerial objects in the preceding
months, Arnold's sightings
seemed to open a floodgate.
Within weeks, there were
more than 3,000 reports
from across North America
and around the world.
Perhaps, it's been
suggested, people
were collectively suffering
some trauma induced delusion,
a reaction to the threat of mass
destruction of a scale never
seen before.
>> Here is the motion picture
spectacle of all time,
a million tons of water
alive with deadly rays,
awe inspiring in its
significance for man who
learned how to control the atom
but must now learn to control
himself.
>> In the midst of the
1947 flying saucer wave,
on July the 7th, the Army
Air Force Base at Roswell,
New Mexico, the home of the only
atomic bomb wing in the world,
issued a press release that it
had recovered a crashed disk.
The DJ at radio
station KGFL says
he was the first to get
the release from Walter
Haut, the base PR officer.
>> He hands me this release.
And he runs around.
He said, you got 30 minutes.
And he's practically
running out the door.
And I'm looking at it,
and I saw a flying saucer.
And I said, wait a minute.
Walter, you know.
And I'm going out
hollering after him.
He said, I got to
get back to the base.
You got 30 minutes.
I couldn't get him to stop.
So I had to wait because he said
he's going back to his office.
I had his number,
called, got him.
I said, Walter,
don't run this story.
If you do, you're
going to be in trouble.
They'll ship you off to Siberia.
I remember mentioning that.
That was a common
phrase in those days.
And he said, look.
He said, the old man
has cleared this.
It's OK to use it.
>> The Army Air Force has
announced that a flying disk
has been found and is now in
the possession of the Army.
>> About that time,
all hell broke loose.
The wire went dead.
And the phones began to ring.
>> And the cavalry
came to the rescue.
The next day at Fort Worth
headquarters, General Roger
Ramey informed a
breathless media
that the intelligence
officers of the only A bomb
base in the US arsenal had
mistaken a common weather
balloon for a crashed
flying saucer.
The press ran the story without
so much as an arched eyebrow.
And that was the last we'd
hear of Roswell for another 35
years, when it would
begin to blow up
into the culture with all
the power of an atomic bomb.
>> The long awaited unification
of the armed services comes
a step nearer.
>> A few weeks after Roswell,
the signing of the National
Securities Act reorganized the
Armed Forces and established
the CIA and the National
Security Council.
>> An iron curtain has
descended across continent.
>> The Cold War was
officially underway.
By August, flying saucer
reports had dropped,
and the press had pretty
well assigned the subject
to the crank file.
After all, no one had seen
or photographed one close up.
And the military was at
least publicly making
light of the whole idea.
But behind the scenes,
things were different.
>> This was something that the
intelligence community took
seriously immediately.
There was a desk called
the collections desk
in the Pentagon
that was interested
in dangerous possible
invasions of American airspace.
And this looked
like that well could
be what this was all about.
>> The Pentagon sent a request
for an evaluation to Air
Materiel Command at Wright
Field in Dayton, Ohio.
After a preliminary
intelligence gathering,
a memo was sent
back to the Pentagon
by Lieutenant General Nathan
Twining, the commanding officer
of Air Materiel Command.
It concluded that the phenomenon
is something real and not
visionary or fictitious
and that the extreme rates
of climb, maneuverability,
and motion, which
must be considered
evasive when sighted
or contacted by friendly
aircraft and radar,
lend belief to the possibility
that some of the objects
are controlled.
>> The natural belief was that
this must be Soviet technology.
The idea that it
was extraterrestrial
did not really come up
there at the very beginning.
>> Finally, Twining's memo
went on to recommend a detailed
codenamed study.
Project Sign was approved
at the end of December
as part of the Air Technical
Intelligence Center
at Wright Patterson
Air Force Base.
It immediately had to
contend with a disaster,
an Air Force plane had
gone down chasing a UFO.
On January 7, 1948, Kentucky Air
National Guard Captain Thomas
F. Mantell's F-51
fighter fell to earth.
He had been chasing a
strange object in the sky.
People have always seen
mysterious things in the sky
and attributed them
to unearthly beings.
In biblical times, it
would appear that angels
zipped about quite frequently.
In one Old Testament tale
often construed as a UFO event,
a fiery wheel carried
the prophet Ezekiel off
to the heavens.
From the Middle Ages up to
the Industrial Revolution,
ecclesiastical symbols found
their way into works of art
as celestial events interpreted
today by many as UFOs.
In the 18th century,
possibly as a reaction
to the rationality
of the Enlightenment,
there emerged a whole genre
of fantastic voyage tales.
>> The most prominent
one we know of is
"Gulliver's Travels."
But in the fantastic
voyage tales
of which there were
hundreds published,
people go traveling to all
kinds of different places,
including outer space.
>> In the last decades of the
19th century, many astronomers,
even such luminaries
as Percival Lowell,
observed a fantastic network of
canals on the surface of Mars.
Around the same time,
there were thousands
of reports of airships
throughout much
of North America,
almost all of which
are now accepted as hoaxes,
mistaken natural phenomena,
or the inventions of readership
hungry newspaper editors.
>> One newspaper in one town
would play a joke on another
town and say they would give
this elaborate article about
this fantastic airship
sighting in the other town.
The town where it actually
happens would say,
nobody here saw that thing.
It was a form of entertainment.
>> Moving from the
profane to the sacred,
at least one of the famous
apparitions of the Virgin Mary
at Fatima Portugal could
easily have been a classic UFO
sighting.
The clouds broke
and the sun appeared
as an opaque spinning
disk in the sky.
It was significantly
less bright than normal,
and it careened towards the
earth in a zigzag pattern.
But it could also read like
religious believers fired up
with faith staring
too long at the sun.
Though the notion of
life on other worlds
had been around since at least
the ancient Greek Atomos,
it was the scientific and
technological breakthrough
explosions of the late 19th
and early 20th centuries
that provided fertile
ground for the idea
to take wide hold
in popular culture.
Pulp science fiction magazines
filled the newsstands,
their covers often showing
prescient illustrations
of what would be
described in the 1947 wave
as flying saucers.
>> The broadcasting system and
its affiliated stations present
Orson Welles and the Mercury
Theater on the Air in "The War
of the Worlds" by H.G. Wells.
>> We know now that in the
early years of the 20th century,
this world was being watched
closely by intelligences
greater than man.
>> Orson Welles' 1938 Halloween
broadcast sent thousands
of listeners into a panic.
>> There's something happening.
Some shape is rising
out of the pit.
--the advancing men.
It strikes them head on.
Oh lord, they're
turning into flames.
>> It quite clearly showed that
beneath the surface of things
extraterrestrial lay
something darkly visceral,
the fear of the other, a
theme that would emerge again
in those early days of 1948.
>> Ladies and gentlemen,
due to circumstances beyond
our control, we are unable--
>> The Air Force accident
investigators concluded that
Captain Thomas F. Mantell had
blacked out from lack of oxygen
at 25,000 feet.
Five minutes earlier,
he had radioed
that he had spotted the
object high above him
and was climbing to
get a closer look.
He described it as metallic
and tremendous in size.
After Mantell apparently
lost consciousness,
his plane had climbed to 30,000
feet when it stalled and began
its death spiral to earth.
News that a pilot had died
chasing a flying saucer
shot across the wires.
The Air Force
investigators announced
that Mantell had died
chasing the planet
Venus, an explanation
that seemed ridiculous
given his description
and eyewitness
accounts of a large, slow
moving, cone-shaped object.
In the early '50s, the Air
Force's Project Blue Book
revisited the case and
concluded that the object
was a top secret Navy
skyhook balloon used
to study cosmic rays.
However, it was under the
shadow cast by the tragedy
that the members of the
Air Force's Project Sign
began their investigation
into flying saucers.
Throughout the winter and spring
of 1948 at Wright Patterson Air
Force Base in building T2, they
began to grapple with the fact
that whatever they were,
the saucers weren't
foreign or secret
domestic technology.
Investigators went
out into the field
to quietly talk to
people, many of them
military who had filed reports.
By March, they had over
300 made by observers
they considered competent.
By summer, a debate was
raging within the Sign team
whether some of the objects
reported were extraterrestrial.
Then one night in July,
an extraordinary incident
unfolded.
>> The case that turned the
corner for Project Sign has
gone by the name of the
Chiles-Whitted case,
out of the two airline pilots
that were the prime witnesses
in the case.
>> Eastern Airlines flight
576 was 20 miles south
of Montgomery, Alabama at 2:45
in the morning of July the 24th
when Captain Clarence S. Chiles
and first officer John B.
Whitted saw an elongated
wingless craft flash
by their plane at what they
estimated as 700 miles an hour.
Both men describe the object
as metallic with two lighted
rows of windows.
On Pentagon instruction,
Sign investigators
hurriedly flew off to
interview Chiles and Whitted.
They were impressed with
the two men's certainty
that what they saw was
a manufactured object.
The Sign team was also
aware of a report the week
before from the Netherlands
of a similar two-tiered craft
and other reports from across
Europe of wingless planes.
Within days of the
Chiles-Whitted sighting,
the Sign team had
committed to a conclusion.
>> The reason why Project
Sign saw this case as being
extraterrestrial was that this
was an object flying freely
and apparently maneuverably
in our environment that had no
wings.
So where would the lift for
a piloted craft of some kind
come from?
What they knew as
technologists at Wright Patt
was the only way such
an object could fly
is if it had a tremendously
powerful energy source.
And the only thing
they could think of
would be something
like nuclear, but they
knew that they had
nothing nuclear
and no one else did either.
They were stuck
with a conclusion
that this was an
extraterrestrial device.
>> As traffic backed up with
employees leaving Wright Patt
at the end of the
midsummer workdays,
the Sign team was hunkered down
writing what they must have
seen as one of the most
important documents ever
written.
It was an estimate of
the situation required
of all military investigations
once they reach a conclusion.
The estimate was then
sent to the Pentagon
where it circulated to
a very mixed reaction.
>> The majority of the people
in the Pentagon at the time
thought that this was not
a message that they wanted
to send out into the world
or even into the military
community itself, that this
was just too strange and too
dangerous.
It was like a unknown
wild card that they
didn't want to let
psychologically
loose within their people.
>> The estimate worked its way
up to the desk of Air Force
Chief of Staff Hoyt Vandenberg,
who was, we can assume,
thrilled to see.
As what he did with
the estimate is
a crucial juncture
in this story,
it's worthwhile to consider
his decision options.
He could, one, reject the
estimate straight away
and bury its conclusions,
two, order further study,
which would serve to keep
its conclusions alive
with the possibility
of leaks, or, three,
accept the conclusions,
which would
mean admitting to the
Congress, the president,
and the American people
that the Air Force was
powerless to prevent
extraterrestrials
of unknown origin and,
worse, unknown intent
from overflying
the United States.
>> Researchers who believe
that a flying saucer crashed
at Roswell are of the opinion
that Vandenberg's decision was
made to perpetuate a cover up.
But Roswell is not
necessary to understand
why the estimate was quashed.
Simple convenience suffices.
The idea it advocated
was dangerous.
The effect on the
population unpredictable.
Authority fears and loathes
one thing above all.
Vandenberg let it be
known to the Sign team
that their conclusions had
no supporting evidence.
All copies of the estimate
were ordered destroyed.
The Sign team was
disbanded and replaced
by Project Grudge,
whose mandate apparently
was to give the public mundane
explanations for all sightings
and shift the emphasis
from the reports
to the people making them.
Flying saucers were to be
a psychological problem.
In December of 1948,
just as Project Sign
was being replaced by the
saucers don't exist Project
Grudge, a series
of sightings called
the green fireballs began
over sensitive military
installations in New Mexico.
They were seen by dozens of
scientists at the Los Alamos
Nuclear Research
Installation and by hundreds
of military personnel.
At least 39 reports were sent
to Grudge by April of '49.
There was great concern in
the scientific community
about what they were.
But Project Grudge,
true to its name,
seemed to begrudge all
requests to investigate.
A few months later, Grudge
cooperated with the Saturday
Evening Post on a major two
part article debunking saucers,
only to see
sightings immediately
hit an all-time high.
Two days after the
article, a fateful telegram
arrived on the desk of a retired
Marine major and former aide
to Charles Lindbergh, now
a successful journalist.
Have been investigating
flying saucer mystery.
First tip hinted gigantic hopes
to cover up official secret.
Believe it may have been
planted to hide real answer.
Looks like terrific story.
Can you take over
Washington end?
Ken W. Purdy, editor
True Magazine.
Initially skeptical, Donald
Keyhoe took the assignment
and began six months
of research drawing
on his extensive
contacts in the military.
The subject of flying saucers
would never be the same.
Meanwhile, through
the rest of 1949,
the team at Project
Grudge did their best
to shoot down any
and all sightings.
They were aided in their
mission by their new astronomer
consultant, J. Allen Hynek.
Hynek was very skeptical.
From the beginning, he
assumed that all reports
were explainable in
conventional terms.
And that is, in
fact, what he did.
That was his function
for the Air Force.
They would take the
cases to him, say,
we can't explain this.
We can't trace a
weather balloon.
Is this a comet, a
meteor, a planet?
And Hynek would provide
the explanation.
>> Donald Keyhoe's True Magazine
article appeared just before
New Year's 1950.
It was the largest selling
issue in the magazine's history.
>> This was a sensation.
This article got press
coverage all over the world.
Keyhoe concluded from
interviewing his Air Force
contacts, interviewing pilots,
other credible witnesses,
that flying saucers
were coming to Earth,
and they'd started watching us
intensely because they began
monitoring our atomic bombs.
>> In 1950, men throughout
the world learned to look
on the brutal face of communism.
Berlin, powder keg--
>> As the road to the Korean
War became a one way downhill
street, a pillar of the
community farming couple
in Oregon on a nice May evening
noticed a strange object
in the sky.
The pictures that Paul
Trent and his wife took
would be among the most highly
analyzed UFO photos ever taken.
And while there have
been many attempts
to expose them as
faked, the efforts
have been far from convincing.
And there was also the lifelong
character of the Trents.
>> Everybody says,
straightforward, honest.
The chance of them making
up a hoax like this is zero.
>> A few months later in
August in Great Falls, Montana,
Nick Mariana, the general
manager of the city's baseball
team, shot some 16 millimeter
film of what he described
as two silent disk like objects.
Mariana showed the film
around town numerous times,
including at club meetings
at the Park Hotel.
>> The little booth next i
a visiting broadcast booth.
>> Gene Black, the son of
one of the board of directors
of the club, later to
become the team's announcer,
remembers being at a screening.
>> Good view.
Shiny, saucer shaped things.
>> Though his recall is
spotty after five decades,
like others who saw the film,
what impressed him was how they
were stationary disks that
took off at a great speed.
>> Hovering.
>> Standing still?
>> Yeah.
But as he's standing
there holding the camera,
they all just started
to go up, very slowly,
and then went shew.
>> In September, the Air Force
heard about the film and asked
Mariana for the footage.
He was happy to oblige.
In October, Project
Grudge announced
their photo analysts
were unable to find
anything of an unusual nature.
Mariana, in a huff,
asked for his film back.
When it was returned,
he claimed the first 35
frames were missing.
The frames he and others
who'd seen the film
said that clearly showed two
spinning disk-like objects.
The Air Force denied the
frames were tampered with.
Mariana pointed
to a splice where
the leader joined the film.
His splicer was perpendicular.
The splice at the head
of the film was diagonal.
The missing frames,
if Mariana and others
were telling the truth, have
never surfaced to this day.
Around the same time
the Grudge was publicly
dismissing the Mariana
film, a foreigner
was visiting Washington with
flying saucers on his mind.
Wilbert Brockhouse Smith,
a senior radio engineer
at the Canadian
Department of Transport
was attending a conference.
Smith was doing research
into geomagnetism
and had been interested
in flying saucers
from the first reports in 1947.
According to a confidential
memo to his transport superiors
that was discovered
in the late '70s,
Smith made discreet inquiries
through the Canadian embassy
to a high ranking US Defense
Research Board scientist
Doctor Robert I. Sarbacher.
The memo described
what he learned.
The matter is the most
highly classified subject
in the United States
government, rating higher even
than the H bomb.
Flying saucers exist and their
modus operandi is unknown,
but concentrated effort is being
made by a small group headed
by Doctor Vannevar Bush.
The entire matter is
considered by the United States
authorities to be of
tremendous significance.
Smith received permission from
the Department of Transport
to set up a flying
saucer detection
unit at the Shirley's Bay
installation just north
of Ottawa.
The unit was shut down a
few years later not having
had any success.
But Smith's memo would
become of huge importance
when it came to light
in the late '70s.
It appeared to confirm
the existence of a crash
recovered saucer and an
above top secret control
group, ideas that
would loom large
in the UFO landscape of
the '80s and the '90s.
1951 would be a slow
year for saucers.
But a striking multiple
radar and visual case
over the New Jersey coast
involved the local Air Force
Base at Fort Monmouth.
Project Grudge was now moribund.
And the commanding officer
sloughed off the incident
calling it radar artifacts.
When this came to
light at the Pentagon,
it caused a major stink.
Major General Charles
Cabell, the head of Air Force
Intelligence, went ballistic.
>> And he stormed around
pointing at various people who
were also there in
his audience saying,
I've been lied to and
lied to and lied to.
He says, I demand that this
subject be taken seriously.
>> Cabell had Grudge reorganized
under more open minded officers
and renamed Project Blue Book.
>> And at that time, probably
the most sympathetic Blue Book
chief at Wright Patterson
Air Force Base was installed.
And that was Captain
Edward Ruppelt.
>> Ed Ruppelt was an
aeronautical engineer
and a good organizer.
More importantly, he
had a sense of history.
Much of what we know
about the early years
comes from the book he wrote
when he left the service.
Around the same time
the winds of change
were blowing through
the Pentagon,
"The Day the Earth Stood
Still" was released.
Directed by Robert Wise,
the message of the film
was as old as the New Testament
complete with crucifixion,
a robotically
assisted resurrection,
and a pointed sermon
from the mount.
>> I came here to
give you these facts.
It is no concern of ours
how you run your own planet.
But if you threaten to
extend your violence,
this Earth of yours will be
reduced to a burned out cinder.
>> The film was the flip side
of the message in another A-list
movie of that year, Howard
Hawks' "The Thing From Another
World."
>> Spread out everybody.
We're going to try to figure
out the shape of this thing.
>> Where an alien monster lies
frozen under the Arctic ice
waiting for the naive
humans to come by.
>> It's round.
>> We finally got one.
We found a flying saucer.
>> Thus begins Hollywood's
projection of flying saucers
onto the ancient
myth of the other,
the stranger who mirrors our
deepest hopes and our most
terrifying fears, a myth that
would continue to play itself
out in fascinating new ways
that would change tunes with
the times.
>> (SINGING) Shine
little glow work glimmer.
Shine little glow worl glimmer.
Lead us--
>> If the history of
UFOs has movements,
each with its own dramatic
arc, the year 1952 would be
the climax of the opening act.
The tumultuous events would
set the course of the history
for the next 15 years.
>> (SINGING) And
lead us on to love.
>> In the spring, Life Magazine
openly wondered if we have
visitors from space and became
as talked about as the 1950
True article.
The New York Times, hostile to
the whole idea from the start,
sneered that the subject had as
much reality as the Loch Ness
Monster.
And the first debunker appeared.
Donald Menzel was a
prestigious Harvard astronomer
who employed all his political
and media connections
to discourage anyone from
taking the subject seriously.
>> He had enough cachet as
a Harvard astronomer to get
into Time Magazine and places
like that with his idea that it
was all oddball radar
reflections and plasma effects
and a bunch of
misinterpreted nonsense.
>> According to Ed Ruppelt,
Menzel and his strained
explanations garnered little
more than contempt at Air Force
Intelligence.
They had their hands full
with the practical problem.
The great saucer wave of
1952 had broken in June
sending everyone
scurrying to keep up.
Reports for the month totaled
144, the highest number ever.
July would more
than triple that.
On July 14th, the
pilot and co-pilot
of a Pan Am flight off
the coast of Virginia
watched six bright orange disks
flying in a line, flip on edge,
get joined in their echelon
by another two disks,
and disappear off
into the distance
at a speed they clocked at
an astounding 12,000 miles
an hour.
Donald Menzel would toss out
many explanations for the Nash
Fortenberry incident.
That old standby
meteors was one.
It's an interesting
irony that the scientists
of the 18th century
couldn't accept that rocks
could fall from the sky.
Menzel also suggested
searchlights playing on clouds.
Although a quick check of
the weather would have shown
it was a cloudless night.
Then he tossed out
reflections in the cockpit
glass of lighted cigarettes
in the passenger cabin.
And finally, in what may have
been a stretch for the ages,
fireflies trapped between the
windshield panes of glass.
But the Nash
Fortenberry incident
was just a harbinger of what was
to come less than a week later
with a series of events
that would completely change
the history of the phenomena.
The midsummer of '52 was
when everything changed.
>> We're talking about
massive wave of sightings.
And they were getting 20
or more sightings per day.
They are flying all up
and down the East coast.
And some people actually
predicted, because of the way
they were doing it,
that they would probably
show up in Washington DC.
And there, in the middle
of July, they did.
>> A cluster of seven blips 10
miles southwest of the capital
was first noticed at 11:40 PM
Saturday July 19th on the long
range radar at Washington
National Airport.
One of the operators looked out
and saw a bright orange light.
When the blips started showing
up over the White House,
Harry Barnes, the senior
traffic controller,
called Andrews Air Force
Base 10 miles to the east.
An Andrews controller was soon
seeing bright orange objects
flashing through the sky.
As the runways at Andrews
were under repair,
jets would have to be dispatched
from Newcastle Air Force Base
30 minutes away in Delaware.
Meanwhile, a Capital Airlines
flight taking off from National
was vectored towards some
radar blips to the west.
As they approached the area,
they saw nothing unusual.
Suddenly, a bluish white
light flashed in front of them
on a 25 degree dive.
Then another one
shot from behind them
zooming up and out of sight.
In the next seven minutes,
they watched seven more lights
all being simultaneously tracked
on the radar back at National.
The most spectacular
incident happened
when National tower
informed Andrews
that they had a target
right over the base.
The operators looked out and
saw huge a fiery orange sphere.
When the jets finally
arrived from Delaware,
all the blips disappeared
only to return
when the jets departed.
Harry Barnes would later
tell the newspapers
that he felt the
targets were somehow
aware of their communications.
>> A little dance went
on for a couple of times.
And it boggled everybody's mind.
The night of Saturday July
19th, dramatic though it was,
would just be the warm up act.
The following Saturday at
9:30, both radars at Washington
National and the one
at Andrews started
getting returns as
visual sightings poured
in from all over the area.
Al Chop, the public
information officer
at the Pentagon for UFOs who
was a confirmed skeptic when
he started the job, was
called out to the tower
at Washington
National at midnight.
There was total confusion
as reports of objects
were coming in droves.
Some of the radar blips
were solid, some less so.
One airline pilot, after
making multiple passes
over the spot he'd
been vectored to,
concluded the target was a
river boat plying the Potomac.
Two jets had arrived earlier.
And again, the objects
had disappeared.
Now a Chop was present,
a second pair arrived.
One was vectored to an area 10
miles out of the city, which
showed radar targets.
As he approached, he
described four white globes
and began to close in for a
much anticipated intercept.
But as Chop and the controllers
watched on the scope,
the object shot right at
the jet and surrounded it.
According to Chop,
the pilot radioed them
for instructions asking,
what do I do now?
Then the glowing
orbs zipped off.
After that, Al Chop was no
longer a skeptic about UFOs.
Monday's banner headline
in the Washington Post
caused mounting concern
of a public panic.
On Tuesday morning, the largest
and longest Air Force press
conference since the Second
World War took place.
The brass, all carefree
smiles, suggested
that a temperature
inversion could
have caused the radars
to pick up ground
vehicles as airborne objects.
The majority of the
media ran with this.
But behind the walls of the
Pentagon in the offices of Air
Force Intelligence,
all explanations
were still very
much on the table.
During the height of
the flap, Ed Ruppelt
had taken a call from
Harry Truman's military aid
General Robert P. Landry
demanding answers.
>> And he told them that they
didn't know what they had
on their hands.
Well, it took Harry
Truman one day
to order Landry to go to the
Joint Intelligence Committee
and to order a study of this.
>> Aside from the question
of what had just happened,
the Washington flap had caused a
major communications breakdown.
>> The hysteria, the jamming of
the telephone lines where you
couldn't even call the Pentagon.
>> When the request at the Joint
Intelligence Committee came
down to take a look at UFOs, the
logical place for that request
to be studied was some agency
other than the one studying it
already, which
was the Air Force.
And so, they picked the CIA.
>> Fred Durant, a
rocket engineer,
was in the CIA's Office of
Scientific Intelligence.
>> The ball was handed to me.
>> Did the CIA have concerns
about the competence of Blue
Book?
>> As far as competence, well,
it was obvious it do not have
professional competency
above an engineer.
>> While Ruppelt was an
aeronautical engineer,
he was just a lowly
reserve lieutenant.
And his understaffed
little project
was now in the glaring spotlight
of the entire Cold War security
apparatus.
Durant and his cohorts from
the CIA went to Wright Patt
to examine Blue
Book's methodology.
After sniffing around,
the CIA decided
to have a scientific panel
to evaluate the Air Force
evidence.
>> CIA wanted to keep this
as an internal project,
which they had
complete control over.
So rather than going to a
good high tech science group,
out of which we
might have gotten
a rather nice estimate again
of what the phenomenon was,
what happened was that they went
to internal CIA consultants.
The most well-known
of which, and a person
who had been chief consulting
scientist for the CIA
in the past, was a guy named
Doctor Bob Robertson, H.P.
Robertson, a nuclear
scientist, more or less
a mathematician from Cal Tech.
>> The Robertson panel met
in secret over four days
at the beginning of January 1953
and spent a total of 12 hours
reviewing in depth only eight
cases of the hundreds that Blue
Book had on file as unknowns.
As an example of
their in-depth review,
they concluded that
the Great Falls Montana
film taken by Nick
Mariana was of two fighter
jets in the area, this, despite
Mariana's claim he observed
the jets a few minutes later.
And had Ruppelt's
reinvestigation
that concluded the planes
were nowhere as near Mariana
as the objects on the film.
>> The Robertson panel
report was basically there
for everybody to
sign the next day.
And it had already been passed
to the chief of Air Force
Intelligence for his approval.
>> The Robertson panel concluded
that as reasonable explanations
could be suggested
for most sightings,
all sightings might be
explained in a similar manner.
It also recommended that to
eliminate national security
communications problems and the
communists using UFO hysteria
to their advantage that
the subject be debunked
and ridiculed, so the
public would no longer
take it seriously.
>> If you wanted to eliminate a
national security problem with
this, you needed to change the
attitude of the American public
to this phenomena.
And the only effective
way of doing that
was to make it be a joke.
There was no science in this
science committee report.
It was all about
national security.
>> The world's
first hydrogen bomb,
housed in this
barn like building,
was to be exploded on
a tiny target island.
>> In the wake of the Robertson
panel's recommendations,
Project Blue Book
was repurposed.
Its funding shrank.
And Ruppelt soon
left the service.
Blue Book continued,
but its role now
seemed to be to carry
out the Robertson panel's
recommendations and debunk UFOs.
Behind the walls
of the Pentagon,
the extraterrestrial debate
at the top levels of Air Force
Intelligence petered out.
The Washington flap
had rattled the windows
in the corridors of
power and raised concerns
about public hysteria in the
perilous times of the Cold War.
A brief period of open
inquiry had come to an end,
and a dark curtain of denial
had once again descended.
>> (SINGING) See the
USA in your Chevrolet.
America' asking you to call.
>> By the early '50s, even
with a new administration
in Washington, it was evident
that any revelations about
the UFO mystery would not be
forthcoming from government.
And civilian
investigation groups
were started up by people
who wanted answers.
But the day was also
dawning on people
who claimed to already know
the answers, the contactees.
In 1952, a man born
in Poland named
George Adamski had walked
out into the Mojave Desert
and met Orthon, a man born on
Venus or so Adamski claimed.
And many thousands
would believe him.
>> It didn't take very long once
people started seeing flying
saucers to present stories
that saviors were actually
descending from the sky, which
is where saviors usually come
from anyway.
But in this case, they came
in a technological form
in a spaceship.
Georgia Adamski's
visiting aliens
incorporated so much angelic
imagery that it's obvious.
>> As his fame grew, Adamski was
soon joined by others claiming
physical and telepathic
contact with the space brothers
and sisters and writing books
about their joy rides with them
to other planets.
1954 saw their first
convention at Giant Rock
in the Mojave Desert.
The contactee
movement was a feast
for the media, an easy
snack of assorted nuts.
This tended to confirm
the suspicions of many
that there was nothing to
flying saucers of any substance.
Among the serious
UFO research groups,
the need was seen for a
high profile organization
in Washington DC to lobby
Congress and press for hearings
into UFOs.
The National Investigations
Committee on Aerial Phenomena
or NICAP was formed in 1956.
It was soon being directed
by that UFO crusader Donald
Keyhoe.
>> Keyhoe was a
master at publicity.
He was good on radio.
He was good on television.
He had a certain kind
of personal charisma.
He was intensely sincere.
He attracted all kinds of people
with solid professional and
middle class
credentials to lobby
for congressional hearings.
>> Today, a new
moon is in the sky.
>> The Soviet launch of Sputnik
shocked America and ushered
in the 1957 wave, notable for
the many close range vehicle
interference cases and
reports of landed craft.
By the end of the
decade, the numbers
at the contactee conventions
at Giant Rock were dwindling.
But the bright eyed
naivete of the '50s
wouldn't come to
a definitive end
until the events of
November the 22nd, 1963.
Dark forces now seemed to
be lurking in the shadows,
and they underscored
the four year UFO wave
that began the same year.
Visual sightings of
distant UFOs were
about to become up
close and personal.
In mid-decade, one such strange
and disturbing encounter
came to light.
It would gain even
greater significance
two decades later
because it involved
missing time, hypnotically
recovered memories
of being abducted, and
the taking of samples
from the human
reproductive system.
>> In a way, it's really
extraordinarily important
for the fact that it
laid down the terms,
although they didn't
know that at the time,
for what the shape the
phenomenon was about to take.
>> Betty and Barney Hill,
returning from a vacation
through the White
Mountains of New Hampshire,
had seen a UFO following
them at close range.
Inexplicably, they arrived
home three hours late.
Betty called her
sister and niece over
to see some strange things
that had occurred that night.
>> The tops of Barney's
shoes were deeply gouged.
We saw the watches that had
stopped working that night.
We saw the highly magnetic
spots, very shiny spots
on the trunk of the car.
>> In separate
hypnosis sessions,
a terrifying ordeal was recalled
where the couple was taken
aboard a craft and subjected
to something like examinations.
>> A needle was
put in her navel.
They told her it was some
sort of pregnancy test.
And a sperm sample
was definitely
taken from Barnney Hill
even though that was not
mentioned in the book, because
it was seen as unseemly.
>> One story just not
a phenomenon make.
And what you're looking
for, of course, is patterns.
And with Barney
and Betty Hill, we
didn't quite know how to
approach it, how to study it,
how to understand
what was happening.
>> As strange as it was,
the Hills' incident was just
an inexplicable blip on
the UFO map of the decade.
If the mid '60s wave
had a climactic event,
it was the infamous
swamp gas incident.
>> Not that it was the
most fabulous of UFO cases,
but it occurred at sort of an
emotional peak that had a lot
of momentum to it as far as
the public was concerned.
>> In March of '66, a localized
wave had hit southern Michigan
lasting over a week.
In one of the more
spectacular incidents,
40 people, including
a dozen policemen,
chased after something
flying around a swamp.
And less than a mile
away over this field,
a patrolman reported a
low flying object approach
and zip 10 feet above his car.
But it was what
happened the next night
at a girls' dormitory at
Hillsdale College that
sparked a media frenzy.
Over the course of an evening,
87 coeds, their dorm mother,
and a civil defense
director watched something
closely resembling what
the policemen saw zip
around the arboretum out back.
First to spot it was Jo Wilson.
She called her roommate
Sarah Robechek to the window.
>> There were three lights.
And this one was bigger
than the other two.
And it pulsated from
white through yellow
to orange to red and back.
I've never seen
anything move that fast.
>> Did it have any sound?
>> Not that we could hear.
>> I don't remember
any sound that night.
>> It was very quiet.
>> Nothing.
And it was a mild spring night.
It was very mild and cold.
>> What happens the next day?
>> CBS, ABC, and NBC fly
into Hillsdale, Michigan.
>> Oh, they loved
that, didn't they?
>> I do know when we got
back to our room that day,
there was a CBS camera man
with his giant camera sitting
on my desk with the camera
pointing out to the arb saying
he was staying all night.
And a TV camera
back then was huge.
>> Blue Book sent Allen Hynek
into the fray to deal with
the media and to
find an explanation.
>> On the basis of a very brief,
literally over the phone piece
of information, and sort of an
accident where he was talking
to a friend from the
scientific community of his,
this friend wondered about
the possibility of swamp gas
as being ignited and showing
kind of a bulbous glowing ball
that people unfamiliar with
it might be confused by.
And Allen, not to
his great credit,
decided that that's what he
was going to go with on this.
And he came out in
public with the idea
that this was a
swamp gas phenomenon.
>> Where we were looking,
there was no swamp.
>> It was an arboretum,
for goodness sakes.
>> The arboretum, yeah.
>> They would go in
there and prune and mow.
And it was pretty.
It wasn't swampy.
>> He stuck his
foot in his mouth.
And people didn't let
him get away with it.
And people were railing on
him across the whole country
right on up to Congress
and Jerry Ford,
who was speaker of
the House at that
time and a rather important
man who felt that his Michigan
constituency had been
publicly embarrassed
by this so-called
government employee.
And he wanted to know
how that had happened.
>> Jerry Ford called for the
long sought after congressional
hearing into UFOs.
It took place over one day
in front of the House Armed
Services Committee.
Highly embarrassed with
the stigma of swamp gas,
Allen Hynek joined
those calling for
an independent scientific
study of the problem.
The Air Force readily
agreed and offered
to fund it, which
probably should
have raised a cautionary flag.
But among the civilian
investigation groups,
there was euphoria.
It appeared there
would finally be
an independent scientific study.
In the wake of the
1966 swamp gas fiasco,
the Air Force approached a
number of A-list universities
to conduct a serious
scientific study of UFOs
and was turned down flat.
Finally, the
University of Colorado,
running low on federal grant
money, considered accepting.
Heading the study would be
the respected physicist Edward
Condon.
>> Edward Condon didn't want
do this for the Air Force,
even though he'd done a lot
of military consultancy work
before because he was like most
other people in the scientific
community.
He thought the whole thing was
nonsense, not worth his time.
But University of Colorado
needed some money.
>> Robert Lowe, the person who
would administer the project,
pitched it to one of the
university trustees thusly.
The trick would
be, to the public,
it would appear a
totally objective study.
But to the scientific
community, it
would present the image
of a group of nonbelievers
trying to be
objective but having
an almost zero expectation
of finding a saucer.
>> And that was Bob Lowe,
the used car salesman,
saying what he had to to the
board of trustees to relax
them, so they could put their
imprimatur on the project.
>> When discovered later, the
memo would have disastrous
consequences and convinced
the civilian research groups
who'd enthusiastically
cooperated up to that point
that a fix was in.
It turned out they were right
but not because of the Lowe
memo.
As the study was
getting underway,
Condon and Lowe met with
their Air Force liaison.
And incredibly, they
asked him what result
the Air Force would like.
The leaders of what's
supposed to be an inquiry
into the reality of UFOs asking
for direction from the agency
who'd been proclaiming
for two decades
that there was absolutely no
reality to them whatsoever.
The liaison officer
replied that the Air Force
was tired of funding
project Blue Book.
>> And what he
says to Condon is,
this project has been a source
of a lot of irritation really
to the Air Force and
a lot of expanse.
And we really need
to get rid of this.
And if you find that you
don't have enough money
to come to a proper
conclusion, reapply,
and you'll get more money.
>> The Colorado study brought
onboard a team of eight
scientists, engineers,
and psychologists.
Alan Hynek consulted
as did Keyhoe and NICAP
and an atmospheric physicist
from the University
of Arizona, Dr. James McDonald.
>> In 1954, he had a UFO
sighting in what we would call
a daylight disk.
And it was really a
very puzzling sighting,
a good sighting, obviously
a very good trained witness.
But he didn't do
anything with it,
because he was starting
his scientific career.
>> In the mid '60s,
McDonald picked up the study
of the phenomenon
with a vengeance,
reading through all the Blue
Book files and the extensive
public literature.
>> He went through all of
this in a period of months,
began talking with witnesses,
was really impressed with
the quality of evidence.
And he thought that this
was the most important
overlooked scientific
question of the century, maybe
one of the most important
of the millennium.
>> McDonal was fearless,
vocal, and tireless.
>> He began giving
hundreds of talks.
And I mean hundreds of talks.
And a lot of scientists in
these prestigious organizations
began to take an open interest
in the subject of UFOs.
>> But even as McDonald was
raising awareness in the wider
scientific community, the
Colorado study researchers were
learning how unusually unaware
Edward Condon appeared to be.
>> He couldn't understand why
people were so upset that he
had talked about trying to
debunk the UFO phenomenon.
Well, to most
people, that sounds
like somebody that's
already got his mind made up
and how can we discredit it.
>> Still hoping for
an objective study,
the Colorado researchers went
into the field to investigate
both old classic incidents and
some new ones as they cropped
up during the
course of the study.
One such case was the Falcon
Lake Manitoba incident,
where a weekend prospector
named Stefan Michalak told
of how he had approached
a landed disk thinking
it was an American
test craft in trouble.
>> He saw two of them.
One stayed in the sky and
then headed off to the north.
And the other one landed over
there on that rock outcropping.
He progressed and walked up to
the door of this thing, which
was situated
somewhere about here,
and put his hand on
the side of the door,
and poked his head in, saw
that there were some flashing
lights like on a computer,
saw that his hand, his glove
was melted very, very hot.
And at this time, he had
already shouted in, come on,
Yankee boys, need some help?
Let me help you
fix your machine.
And the voices stopped.
At this point, the
doors on this thing
slid shut, kind of like an iris.
And the entire
object rotated, so
that there was a grille
or exhaust vent right
in front of him.
And as he stood right close
to it, a blast of hot gas
shot out, knocking
him down, and then
actually setting
some of his clothes
on fire with the intense heat.
And the object took
off, rose into the air.
And because he was
disoriented and distracted,
he couldn't tell which
direction it went.
But he spent some time rolling
on the ground putting out
his clothes, taking them off.
And then the ordeal of
getting back to civilization
began, because he was
feeling very nauseous,
very, very disoriented.
>> Michalak staggered out of the
bush and got back to Winnipeg
extremely sick.
And I remember going
into their bedroom.
And even before I stepped
in over the threshold,
the smell in the house and the
smell coming from the bedroom
was horrible.
But for days afterwards,
the smell lingered.
And the more I visited with
him, the more we chatted,
the more it felt as though the
smell was coming out of him,
that he was exuding this
stink, that it was pouring out
of his pores.
>> He also had some
fainting spells.
He had a recurring
skin condition
as a result and some
burning to his legs
too, because when
he fell backwards,
the blast also caught
him on the legs.
>> Two weeks later, Roy Craig,
a Colorado study chemist,
accompanied Michalak,
a "Life" photographer,
and Canadian authorities in
a journey out to the site.
They found it suspicious that
Michalak couldn't find the rock
outcrop where he claimed the
encounter had taken place.
There was also a forest
ranger tower a mile away,
and the ranger hadn't noticed
anything unusual in the air.
For these reasons, Roy
Craig dismissed the incident
as a hoax.
But in the following
months and years,
Michalak's health
suffered immensely
from no diagnosable cause.
That, and the
official skepticism,
affected him for the
remainder of his life.
>> What bothered him most
was being let down by all
of the people he turned to
and said, this happened to me.
Help me.
What is this?
Instead, he got,
well, we're not sure.
You burned yourself
on a barbecue.
Blah, blah, blah.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Meanwhile, back at the
University of Colorado,
Condon was spending little
time with the project.
Instead of doing any
field investigation,
he was enjoying the
company of contactees
and regaling his
professional colleagues
with their absurd tales.
When Jim McDonald gave a
seminar in the summer of '67,
Condon fell asleep twice.
That same summer, Roy Craig
happened upon Lowe's trick memo
in the files, the one written
to sell the university
trustees on the project.
Disturbed, Craig showed it
to Norman Levine and David
Saunders, two of
the project's staff
who were most bothered
by Condon's behavior.
Saunders showed
it to Keyhoe, who
gave it to Jim McDonald, who
mentioned it in a long letter
to Lowe about the negative
direction the project seemed
to be taking.
>> Bob Lowe was very,
very worried about this.
But Ed Condon, typically of
him, was explosive about it.
He considered this
to be an issue
of betrayal on the
part of what should
be a private in-house team.
And he called David Saunders
and Norman Levine in,
and he just fired them.
And he not only fired them, but
he told them that if he could,
he would ruin their
academic careers over this.
>> As threats of suits and
counter-suits filled the air,
Lowe's assistant
administrator resigned,
citing an almost unanimous
lack of confidence in his
objectivity.
>> All these people are falling
out of this so-called objective
scientific project.
They're dropping like flies.
And what you have left over
is Ed Condon, and Roy Craig,
and a bunch of other
people who've basically
been added on at the
last second, trying
to cobble together a
mishmash of documents
that they called the
scientific study of UFOs.
Well, it was a
terrible piece of work.
>> The report was immediately
hailed by "The New York Times"
science reporter, who had
turned out had already written
a laudatory introduction
to the paperback edition.
Its 1,485 pages were
prefaced by Condon's 50 pages
of negative
conclusions, conclusions
that dismissed or ignored
much of the analysis
in the body of the report.
Bill Hartman, extremely
skeptical about UFOs,
had nevertheless concluded
about the Trent pictures
that all factors appear to be
consistent with the assertion
that an extraordinary
flying object flew
within the sight
of two witnesses.
>> He, in his conclusions,
completely ignores--
>> Yeah.
>> --ignores talking about that.
And in fact, infers the
opposite, no question.
>> Yeah, yeah.
I think infers the opposite is--
>> Infers the opposite--
>> --fair.
And yeah, I don't know
quite what to say.
I think what you're
saying is basically right.
Whether those
conclusions should have
been written
totally differently,
I suspect they
should have been--
you don't write those
things without sort
of knowing what the
consequences are going
to be for people at his level.
And I don't know.
Maybe he's just more,
even more deviously canny
than I'm saying.
Because maybe he just figures,
well, if I, Edward Condon,
say there's nothing
here in this report,
nobody will bother
to go further.
>> Both McDonald and Allen
Hynek fought tenaciously against
the acceptance of Condon's
conclusions within
the scientific community,
but it was a losing battle.
The Air Force shut
down Blue Book,
and Keyhoe's NICAP went into
a steep membership decline.
McDonald sunk into a depression
from marital problems
and would soon
take his own life.
Hynek Nick soldiered
on, founding
the Center for UFO Studies.
But the ground was shifting
in a fundamental way.
>> As proof of the
extraterrestrial hypothesis
remained elusive, some
ufologists began to look
in other directions.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> As the late '60s saw
the planet as a whole,
undivided by
artificial boundaries,
the decade had also brought into
the culture the Eastern notion
of expanded consciousness.
And tagging along, its
frequent fellow travelers--
the paranormal and the occult.
>> In 1969, Jacques Valle
wrote a book called "Passport
to Magonia," where he links
modern UFOs to traditional
beliefs about
fairies, demons, gods,
entities of various kinds.
>> Jacques Valle had been
one of Allen Hynek's graduate
astronomy students.
And Valle's influence had
been one of the reasons
for Hynek's change
of heart on UFOs.
In his new book, Valle pointed
out that the reports of fairy
encounters of yore and modern
UFO occupant reports had many
qualities in common.
In Europe, many researchers
embraced this idea,
that a UFOs were the modern
face of an old phenomenon, one
that was psychosocial in
nature, not extraterrestrial.
>> The whole premise was
that these things couldn't be
happening.
This was implicit.
It was really the
debunking view by another,
more pretentious name.
And so there was
this great effort
to study the most extreme
kinds of experiential claims,
and without really much
empirical investigation
or documentation, just
claiming that by their nature,
they were explainable as
the witnesses' deep-seated
psychological or spiritual
needs, often ascribed
to witnesses that the
writers had never met
and knew nothing about,
except what they had reported.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[HELICOPTER BLADES]
>> As if to offset all
this armchair theorizing,
1973 saw a massive UFO wave.
In one spectacular episode,
four Ohio National Guardsmen
reported narrowly
averting a collision
with an object that stopped
for a few seconds above.
>> It was so close
to us, at that time,
I was concerned that we
might have a blade strike,
because I could see the tips of
the rotor blades reflecting off
the light.
And it was awful close to that.
And it was, as I say,
this big thing in front--
big, black solid thing,
because the stars
were gone in front of us.
I don't know.
I'm guessing 80, 80
feet, maybe, long.
>> What were you thinking
when you looked at it?
>> I was awestruck.
>> The entire event was observed
by a family on the ground
Philip J. Klass, an aviation
journalist and the arch UFO
skeptic now that Donald
Menzel had retired,
explained that what the
guardsman saw was a slow-moving
meteor.
[LAUGHTER]
>> That's worse than swamp gas.
>> That is.
That is awful.
>> That's worse than swamp gas.
>> Yes, yes.
>> Therefore, I shall resign the
presidency, effective at noon.
>> But as the times
grew in uncertainty,
so it seemed did the will to
believe in cause and effect
connections that strain facts,
especially archaeological ones.
>> [INAUDIBLE] didn't
know about astronauts.
But we do.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The 1974 documentary
"Chariots of the Gods"
popularized the notion
that the mysterious wonders
of the ancient world were
attributable to alien
astronauts.
The film grossed $25 million.
>> The giant drawings must have
been made for someone arriving
by air.
>> But if extraterrestrials have
made contact with our primitive
ancestors, they remain
stubbornly aloof from us,
except apparently
in rare incidents--
one in particular that revealed
that a face to face encounter
with an advanced
non-human intelligence
might have profoundly
disturbing undercurrents.
Toward the end of 1975, in the
forests of northern Arizona,
a truck carrying
home six loggers
stopped when they noticed a
glowing object in a clearing.
Travis Walton jumped out
and walked towards it.
His friends told the police
that they took off in fright
when they saw him knocked
flying by a bright blue flash,
and that when they returned
15 minutes later, he was gone,
and so was the object.
Five days later, a shaken
and dazed Travis Walton
called from a roadside phone.
He didn't remember much
about what happened,
but he would never forget
the moments after he
regained consciousness.
>> I was in a lot of pain,
and I didn't remember what had
happened at first.
But then that kind
of came back to me.
But I still didn't put it
together with where I was.
I was thinking
that I'd been hurt,
and they'd taken
me to a hospital
and that's where I was, that the
sounds of movement around me,
that these were doctors, and
things were under control.
There was some sort of a device
pressing down on my chest.
And all of the
pain and everything
made me feel like
I just better stay
still because that's what
you do in a situation
when you're being treated.
But I don't think I
was being treated.
When I finally could focus
my eyes, and saw where I was,
and saw these creatures--
just to look into the eyes
of something, a thinking
creature that wasn't human--
it was a shock.
That instant is something
that'll never, never leave me.
>> Steven Spielberg gave
an interview when he was
in pre-production on "Close
Encounters of the Third Kind."
He talked about one night
driving out to the desert,
staring at the
sky, and wondering,
if a UFO came down and
landed, would he get aboard?
Suddenly, he got
very frightened.
He jumped in his car
and drove back to LA.
"Close Encounters
of the Third Kind"
was the first great UFO film.
But in the actual
landing scene, the humans
are struck not with
fear, but with awe.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The aliens are angelic.
The film's release marked
another turning point.
UFOs, the rejected
child of science,
had passed out of the realm
of mainstream culture.
It was now the province of
pop culture and its myths.
And of its myths, the film's
culminating contact scene
was foretelling.
During the first three
decades of the phenomenon,
there had been no attempt by our
apparent visitors to say hello.
The mythic unconscious, like
nature, abhors a vacuum.
And the notion of contact
would dominate the last three
decades.
But if the Spielberg version
was all sweetness and light,
the dark side was just
around the corner.
By the late '70s, requests
made under the new US Freedom
of Information Act were
revealing a fascinating series
of incidents at
Minuteman missile bases
along the US-Canada
border, and showing
that despite the end
of Project Blue Book,
the Air Force continued
to investigate
UFO reports involving its
personnel and facilities.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It was a period of flux,
when the modern history
of the phenomenon was about to
make a radical course change.
A fateful moment
arrived as a tip
from a television
station manager.
>> Out of the blue,
he says, you know,
the guy you ought to
talk to is Jesse Marcel.
And brilliant investigator
that I am, I said, who's he?
And he says, oh, he
handled the wreckage of one
of those saucers
you're interested in.
He was in the military.
What?
>> The events related
by Major Jesse Marcel,
retired former intelligence
officer of the 509th atomic
bomb wing at
Roswell, New Mexico,
would provide the seed for a
crashed saucer story that would
take root and grow like an
enormous weed to overrun
the UFO landscape.
Witnesses were discovered who
reported a massive recovery
operation.
More witnesses came
forward, claiming
they saw wreckage and bodies.
>> By 1980, we
talked to 62 people.
By '85, it was 92 people.
Around the same time, the
memo that Wilbert Smith
wrote to his superiors
in Ottawa back in 1950
was discovered in his
papers, the one reporting
on his conversation with Defense
Research Board scientist Dr.
Robert Sarbacher that a crashed
saucer was being analyzed
by a small group of top
level scientists led
by Defense Research Board
chief Vannevar Bush.
Sarbacher was still alive.
And when contacted, he confirmed
the contents of the Smith memo.
It seemed that a cover up was
finally beginning to unravel.
Then, in the mid-'80s--
>> Documents began to appear--
documents of unknown
provenance, for the most part.
>> The MJ-12 documents seem
to confirm the Roswell crash
in the New Mexico desert.
They purported to be an
eyes-only briefing given
in 1952 to Dwight Eisenhower
about Operation Majestic
12, an above top secret project
dealing with crashed saucers
and their occupants.
Prominently mentioned
was Dr. Vannevar Bush,
thus seeming to confirm
Wilbert Smith's memo.
Also present, others
who weighed heavily
in the history of
the phenomenon,
including the arch
debunker, Dr. Donald Menzel,
confirming many a
UFO researchers'
suspicion that debunkers are
really government agents.
For most researchers,
though, the documents
looked like a plant.
Suspicion fell on an agent named
Richard Doty in the Air Force
Office of Special Investigations
at Kirtland Air Force
Base near Albuquerque.
The Office of Special
Investigations
is the Air Force's
counterintelligence unit.
And a few years before,
at their Kirtland offices,
Doty had met with a
producer preparing a program
on UFOs for the HBO network.
And with cloak and
dagger theatrics,
he had shown her a
very similar document.
>> There it was,
written in dry English,
about the United States
government's efforts
to retrieve crashed disks
and non-human bodies,
both dead and alive, from
a variety of locations.
And I recall seven,
at least, were listed.
>> Linda Howe was also promised
long-rumored Air Force footage
of a UFO landing at White
Sands, New Mexico in 1964.
After a six-month runaround,
the footage never materialized,
and HBO canceled
her documentary.
With such a pedigree,
the MJ-12 documents
were suspected of being
disinformation, possibly
intended to keep the
increasing numbers of Roswell
researchers busy
chasing shadows,
and well away from whatever
real secrets the Air Force had,
UFOs or otherwise.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> "UFO Cover-Up, Live."
>> The following year, a Fox
television special claimed
to shed light on MJ-12
and the UFO cover-up.
>> How did you acquire
the MJ-12 documents?
>> They were mailed to me in
a plain brown envelope which
contained a--
>> The two researchers
who'd been the recipients
of the MJ-12 documents
introduced us to the Aviary.
>> MJ-12 was a group of
people within the government.
MJ-12 was created
by President Truman.
>> A silhouetted operative
codenamed Falcon,
claimed later by the producer
to be Richard Doty himself,
informed us of the structure
of MJ-12 and the startling news
that aliens had been held
since the Truman administration
in a top secret underground
installation called Area 51.
>> Their internal
organs are quite simple.
>> Among the details given about
their bodies, civilization,
and culture were their
partiality to Tibetan ritual
music and strawberry ice cream.
>> They have a religion, but
it's a universal religion.
>> It didn't really require an
alien crystal ball to perceive
that with this event, UFO
mythology was veering sharply
towards the
conspiratorial fringes.
Less evident was how much
this would be lapped up
by popular culture.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Back in 1953, the
CIA Robertson Panel
had recommended debunking
the phenomenon's reality
and thereby its ability
to affect the population.
That had obviously failed.
Now, in the light of
the MJ-12 documents,
one had to wonder if
the phenomenon was being
deliberately manipulated--
possibly to hide any real UFO
secrets, but just as possibly
to provide a useful cover
for things more earthly,
like top secret black projects.
Whatever the reasons
behind the MJ-12 documents,
they did marginalize
UFO mythology
to the outer fringes of the
culture, which might have
been their intent all along.
But by happenstance,
the late '80s
saw a new wrinkle
in things that would
serve much the same purpose.
>> After 1987, the media
became much more interested
in the abduction phenomenon, and
there was sort of an avalanche
of shows that featured it.
It was a very good ratings
getter, and so forth.
>> UFO abductions seemed to
strike a deeply resonant chord
when they appeared in the mass
media in 1987 with the release
of two books.
Budd Hopkins's
"Intruders" expanded
on the similar
memories of people
who claim missing time
around a UFO encounter.
The aliens' interest in the
human reproductive system that
first appeared with the Betty
and Barney Hill incident
back in the '60s now
apparently included
a production line of hybrid
children, part human, part
alien.
>> I was, in a certain
sense, sticking my neck out,
because other researchers
are going to say, well,
I've never found anything
like this myself.
There's nothing to this.
Or counter-intuitive
evidence is going
to come forward, and so forth.
And yet in actual fact,
people began saying, my gosh.
When I explore
these other avenues,
I'm finding the
same thing he found.
>> At the same time,
almost in the same week,
the book "Communion" came
out, written by an abductee,
a person who claims to be an
abductee, Whitley Strieber.
And it hit the top of "The New
York Times" Best Seller list.
It was on "The New York Times"
Best Seller list for 32 weeks.
And it was number one in
the country for 19 weeks.
That book had a tremendous
impact societally.
And the impact was
not so much what
he had to say, which
was important enough,
but was the illustration
on the cover,
the sort of staring alien
that absolutely frightened
the devil out of
people who might
have had these experiences.
They became scared to death.
People told me they saw
the book in a bookstore,
and they just ran.
They ran out of the
mall and kept running.
They were so frightened.
>> Perhaps the "Communion" cover
art did somehow lift the veil
from repressed memories.
But the consistent
themes in the abduction
narrative also
appeared to express
the concerns of the times--
the individual's
loss of control,
genetic manipulation,
and the emerging worries
about the health of the earth.
Real or not, abductions
were touching
on something deeply mythic.
Up to this time,
crop circles had just
been indistinct ground markings,
apparently of landed saucers.
Now they began to appear
as elaborate mandalas,
mostly in England,
where it should
be noted that landscaping
is a form of religion.
Those who believe
some of the circles
were more than the work of
nocturnal serial artists
saw them as coded messages
from extraterrestrials.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Also looking for coded messages
from the stars, the search
for extraterrestrial
intelligence, or SETI projects,
were getting underway.
One of the major objections
by the scientific community
to the idea of flying saucers
zipping around our planet
was the limiting
factor of the speed
of light, a consequence of
Einstein's special theory
of relativity.
If nothing could travel
faster than light,
a jaunt to just the nearest star
would take an absolute minimum
of 4 and 1/2 years.
Therefore, scientists reason,
that if anyone traveled
the vast distances, even
in our local neighborhood,
it would be very rarely.
And it wouldn't look
like the seeming traffic
jam being reported.
So SETI projects
started up with the idea
that smart aliens would
stay home and contact us
by an interstellar version of an
inexpensive long distance card.
Of course, all this assumes that
the speed of light cannot be
sidestepped in ways unknown
to our present physics.
Given the ever-changing
history of physical laws
over the last few hundred
years, that assumption
would appear to be more a
leap of faith than science.
>> It's also part of the
in-training of a scientist
to set borders on what
that scientist believes is
the nature of reality.
And it's a lot more comfortable,
if you have the arrogance
that you think you're
going to explain everything
sooner or later, to have a
rather narrow set of fences.
>> The early '90s saw growing
media fascination with
the Roswell incident.
New Mexico house
representative Steven Schiff
asked the Air Force about it and
hit a bureaucratic stonewall.
Annoyed by the lack
of response, he
requested the General
Accounting Office
to investigate Air Force
communications in and out
of Roswell in 1947.
The Air Force
subsequently decided
to conduct their own inquiry.
>> First of all, the
report was prepared
by counter-intelligence
people within the Air Force.
It's a case of the fox
guarding the henhouse, I think.
>> The Air Force report was
prepared by the same Pentagon
personnel that many researchers
believe had authored the MJ-12
documents.
Its 998 pages concluded that
there was indeed a cover up.
But it was only of debris from
a secret Project Mogul balloon
launch that had gone missing.
Moguls were huge
balloon assemblies
intended to explore the
possibility of remotely
monitoring Soviet A-bomb tests.
But there were multiple
problems with the explanation.
First of all, there was no
definitive evidence outside
of one scientist's
50-year-old memory
that the particular Mogul
launch had ever taken place.
And then, even leaving aside
the multiple witness testimony
about the unearthly
nature of the material
recovered, the apparent size
and secrecy of the recovery
operation itself, and
the reported threats
made to witnesses
about keeping silent,
there remain the simple
fact that Mogul assemblies
were mostly weather balloons,
tin foil and balsa wood.
So how would the chief
intelligence officer as well as
the base commander mistake
such mundane material
and announce it to the
world as a flying saucer?
Also somewhat damning was that
the General Accounting Office
found that all communications
in and out of the Roswell
base for the period
had been destroyed
without authorization.
But as there was no smoking, gun
Roswell would remain a mystery.
Whatever came down in
the desert back in 1947
would continue to be
obscured by an expanding
tangle of testimony,
by suspect documents,
and by what would become
the UFO hoax of all time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In 1995, Fox broadcast
what purported
to be film of a
Roswell alien autopsy.
Is it faked?
the program asked.
But the question was
really rhetorical,
as the only required answer
was enormous ratings.
As tabloid TV was feasting
like zombies on UFOs,
the mainstream media
apparently decided
to rise above the
silliness, and they
stopped reporting UFO
sightings altogether,
even ones that were
quite spectacular.
In a 1996 incident in
the Yukon, 31 people
in four different groups
along a 340-kilometer stretch
of the Klondike highway
described an enormous object,
triangulated later at up to
two kilometers in diameter.
It went virtually unreported
in the national media.
>> Oh my God.
>> What the hell are you doing?
Get back in the car, asshole!
>> But if the major news outlets
now ignored UFO accounts,
Hollywood executives had no
problems distorting them.
"Fire in the Sky" portrayed
the Travis Walton incident.
>> While we were preparing
"Fire in the Sky"
to go before the cameras, some
of the executives at Paramount
suddenly came in the next day
with this great revelation.
Oh my God, there's
already been something
that has little beings with
gray skin and big eyes.
And what are we going to do?
And I tried to
explain to them, yeah,
that's what gets
reported most often.
And they really didn't
understand that.
So they made it
an absolute demand
that we change the
scene onboard the ship,
or there would be no movie.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The film turned Travis's
recollections aboard the craft
into a graphic horror movie,
complete with the requisite
slime effects of the period.
[SCREAMING]
The movie did, however,
portray Travis's terror.
And as many thousands of
people approached therapists
and investigators
with their stories,
terror was one
common denominator.
But there were also
others, procedures
that happened aboard the craft
that were not publicly known.
Many explanations for
abductions were proposed.
In the psychological
model, the episodes
were confabulation, the result
of the confusion between memory
and fantasy in some individuals,
nurtured by widespread accounts
in the media.
>> The idea that cultural
sources are responsible
for the consistency of abduction
reports runs aground on two
problems.
In the first place,
as folklore shows us,
people will take a story,
but they will always vary it.
They'll always add to it,
change it, personalize it--
in some way, make a new creation
out of the old materials.
We don't see that with
the abduction stories.
There'll be some degree
of personalization.
But as far as the actual
phenomenology of the story,
there's really surprisingly
little variation.
We get all kinds of variation
with the urban legends,
but we don't get them
with the abduction story.
Now, the second problem
is that these stories
were consistent from the start.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If the psychological
interpretation had its problems
explaining abductions,
the realist camp faced
a significant obstacle as well.
>> The kind of hard evidence
that these things are occurring
in the world within consensus
reality never materialize.
>> One of the real problems--
why are they carrying this out
on an industrial scale?
I mean, they're obviously
not doing science.
>> The enormous numbers of
apparent abductions did seem
to cast doubt on their
physical reality.
But by the late '90s, both David
Jacobs and Budd Hopkins had
reached the extraordinary
conclusion that they were,
in fact, the key to the
entire UFO phenomena,
and what had been going on, at
least through the last century,
was the creation of a huge
number of human-looking hybrids
to be inserted on this planet--
at best, as a kind of
genetic maintenance program,
and at worst, as a
surreptitious takeover.
>> As crazy as it sounds, as
off the wall as it sounds,
this really is happening.
It is frightening.
It's terrorizing in a sense.
It is not something I ever,
ever expected to hear.
>> We don't get anything
that diverges from this.
Yet, the "this" we're
talking about is really
a future thing which we do
not understand yet, fully.
In human terms,
anthropomorphic terms,
it does look like, ultimately,
some kind of takeover.
>> With such a dark vision,
it's not surprising that neither
the majority of researchers nor
the media embrace the Jacobs
Hopkins scenario.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In "Taken," a 2002 Steven
Spielberg-produced TV mini
series, the reason for the
huge numbers of abductions was
flipped on its
mythological head--
the whole intention being to
genetically engineer an avatar.
>> It doesn't seem right to
interfere with us the way they
did.
>> Maybe not to us, but if we
saw this from someplace else,
it was just time
for this to happen.
>> For what to happen?
>> Me.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> A new messiah who would
go off into the interstellar
wilderness, but would presumably
one day return to lead humanity
through the next stage
of its evolution.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Today, if the interpretations
of the UFO phenomenon
have changed
dramatically since 1947,
they still seem to be defined
by those ancient catalysts
of myth--
fear and hope.
And if the major media now
mostly ignore the subject,
the internet boils over with it.
Tens of millions of hits
on UFOs will bring up
countless photos, and videos,
and the conspiracy wrinkle
of the moment.
There's little doubt
that fringe mythology now
obscures the actual phenomenon,
marginalizing it more than
at any time in its history.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So even though people
continue to see
the same things in
the sky, and surveys
show that half the population
believe we're being visited,
there remains little possibility
that a serious scientific study
will take up the question.
>> We in academia have
it made, after all,
especially scientists
in academia.
We're kind of at the top
of the pecking order.
And in order to maintain that
illusion, which is what it is,
we have got to not
appear the fool.
So the majority of the
scientific community
is a very non-risk
taking group of people
that live in a rather
small reality and are,
in fact, scared of
things which seem
to be outside that reality.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The reality almost never
mentioned with this subject
is that our universe is
13.7 billion years old.
And our solar system formed
only 4.6 billion years ago.
That makes us, in all
probability, the new kids
on a very old block.
In all likelihood, the
first advanced intelligence
in our galaxy has at least
a few billion years' head
start on us.
In other words, the
version of contact
that we typically
imagine, the version
that has us as
more or less equal,
is almost certainly
a myth we create
to shield us from a reality
that is beyond our ability
to understand.
The belief by many that if we're
being visited, they'd stop by
and say, hello, may
make about as much sense
as us leaning over an
anthill and saying,
take me to your leader.
In this light, the suggestion
that a far more advanced
intelligence might create
an intermediate hybrid race
to communicate with or to
absorb an emerging civilization
is an idea hardly less
reasonable than any other.
(SINGING) We lived
our little drama--
>> Still it may turn out that
the debunkers are right--
the unknown objects flying
around our atmosphere,
just mistaken identity, the
wishful thinking of our race
as it looks outward
on a vast mystery.
But of the countless
thousands of reports worldwide
since 1947, there are
at least many hundreds
that are strongly compelling--
multiple observers, simultaneous
instrument trackings,
performance that defies our
understanding of physics.
Are all of them just the
mythic projection of our hopes
and fears, our unconscious
way of seeing our meaning
in a universe that seems
indifferent to our presence?
(SINGING) And in the
sense, just you me.
>> Or are they a mysterious
reality from which our myths
take root and grow and lead
us onward towards our destiny?
Though I've never seen
anything that's unambiguously
a UFO, after spending
a few years on this,
I'd say if some of these
things are not someone
from somewhere else, you could
blow me over with a feather.
I'm still standing.
[MUSIC PLAYING]